---
layout: seminartalk
speaker: Evelyne Hubert
speakerinst: Inria Méditerranée, France.
speakershortinst: INRIA
speakerurl: http://www-sop.inria.fr/members/Evelyne.Hubert/
talktitle:  Scaling Invariants and Symmetry Reduction of Dynamical Systems. Application to Parameter Reduction.
talkdate: 27.04.2015
talktime: 11.00 (sharp)
talkplace: M2 
talkterm: spring2015
title: "Large Structures Seminar - Evelyne Hubert"
dinnerplace: 
dinnertime: 
dinnerurl: 
---
The original motivation for this research  in collaboration with
George Labahn (U. of Waterloo, Canada) is to provide an algorithmic
scheme for the reduction of parameters  in physical, chemical or biological models by elaborating on the interpretation of this problem as 'nondimensionalisation'.

Scalings form a class of group actions on affine spaces that have both theoretical and practical importance. A scaling is accurately described by an integer matrix. Tools from linear algebra over the integers are exploited to compute a minimal generating set of rational invariants, trivial rewriting and rational sections for such a group action. The primary tools used are Hermite normal forms and their unimodular multipliers.

The same information is sufficient to offer a complete symmetry
reduction scheme for either polynomial systems or dynamical systems. A
special case of the symmetry reduction algorithm applies to reduce the
number of parameters in mathematical models.

Our approach is reminiscent of  the premisces of the Buckinmgham-Pi theorem. Note though that we do not resort to fractional powers and that we can rewrite the original equations in terms of the new variables by a simple substitution.

