---
layout: seminartalk
speaker: Victoria Gould
speakerinst: University of York
speakershortinst: York
speakerurl: https://www.york.ac.uk/maths/staff/victoria-gould/
talktitle: Finitary properties for monoids
talkdate: Feb 28 2019
talkterm: "2019S2"
talktime: "16.00"
talkplace: Lecture Theatre D
title: "Pure Maths Colloquium - Victoria Gould"
---

Studying algebras via their finitary properties is a classic approach stretching back to Noether and Artin in the early part of the last century. Here by a *finitary property* for a class of algebras $$\mathcal{A}$$ we mean  a property, defined for algebras in $$\mathcal{A}$$,  that is guaranteed to be satisfied by any finite member of $$\mathcal{A}$$. Of course, the idea is that it will also be satisfied by some infinite algebras in $$\mathcal{A}$$, and the fact that it is will ensure that such algebras behave in some way like the finite ones. 

This talk will focus on finitary properties for monoids. Many of these arise naturally from the representation of a  monoid $$S$$  via mappings of sets or, equivalently and more concretely, by *$$S$$-acts*. A right $$S$$-act is a set $$A$$ together with a map $$A\times S\rightarrow A$$ where $$(a,s)\mapsto as$$, such that 
for all $$a\in A$$ and $$s,t\in S$$ we have $$a1=a$$ and $$(as)t=a(st)$$. For example, a monoid is *right noetherian* if every right congruence is finitely generated, and this is equivalent to every monogenic right $$S$$-act being finitely presented. 

A finitary  property of particular interest to me is that of coherency.  We say that a monoid $$S$$ is *right coherent* if every finitely generated $$S$$-subact of every finitely presented right $$S$$-act is finitely presented. *Left coherency* is defined dually
and $$S$$ is *coherent* if it is both right and left coherent. These notions are analogous to
those for a ring $$R$$ (where, of course, $$S$$-acts are replaced by $$R$$-modules).   
Coherency arises naturally from several directions, as this talk will explain, and is closely related to the notion of acts being algebraically closed. 
We examine the connection with other finitary properties, such as that of being right noetherian. 
Of course one wants to know which monoids *are* (right) coherent, and how coherency behaves with respect to some standard constructions. These question turns out to be hard to answer, in spite of us having a condition for coherency analogous to that of Chase for rings. 

I will present a selection of the results in this area and also a number of open problems. The talk will be aimed at a non-specialist audience.


The results in this talk are taken from many sources, the most recent being  joint   with Yang Dandan, Miklós Hartmann, Thomas Quinn-Gregson, Nik Ruškuc and Rida-e Zenab.